# Sistine 🏰

**Sistine** is a simple, flexible, productive static site generator written in [Ink](https://dotink.co/) and built on [Merlot](https://github.com/thesephist/merlot)’s Markdown engine. You can see a live demo of a Sistine site [on the Sistine docs website](https://sistine.vercel.app/).

## Documentation

Sistine's documentation lives on its website at **[sistine.vercel.app](https://sistine.vercel.app)**. There, you'll find information on how to install and use Sistine, as well as a reference for its templating language.

## Development

This repository technically contains two projects. (1) The Ink source code for the Sistine static site generator, and (2) the documentation site for Sistine, which is generated by Sistine itself from assets in this repo. Both parts of this repository uses a Makefile to manage common build commands.

### Sistine, the tool

Sistine's source code mostly lives in `./src`, with vendored dependencies copied into `./vendor`. Tests for Sistine utilities are in `./test`.

- `make fmt`  or `make f` formats all Ink files (including tests) in the repository.
- `make check` or `make t` runs all tests in the repository.

### Sistine, the website

The Sistine documentation website is a normal Sistine project, living in this repository.  The repository is set up with Vercel so that contents of `./public` auto-deploys on every commit to `main`. Other parts of the website, like the content pages and templates, are set up exactly as a normal Sistine project, in `./content` and `./tpl` respectively.

- `make` will run Sistine from within the repository to build the documentation site to `./public`.

### Contributing & reporting issues

// TODO

